If we recall back to the authorization code grants we
used in our server-side web app, in the first part of the flow,
the access code was retrieved by going through the user's browser,
the front channel.
Once the client received the access code,
it exchanged it for the access token by going via the back channel,
directly to the authorization server.
The reason that worked is that the client can provide a secret to
authenticate itself with the authorization server.
And the reason for going via the back channel is that
it is more simpler and more secure.
It's just a direct call to the server via HTTP over
TLS so it can't be tampered with.
We can trust it because it came directly from the authorization server.
Whereas via the front channel,
we are actually using the user's address bar to transmit data
between the client and the authorization server,
which makes things more complicated and is not as
secure as the back channel request.
It's a little bit like the game of Chinese Whispers.
Some malicious software on the user's browser or machine could tamper
with the URL so you cannot completely trust it.
The redirect is also more susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks,
and URLs are written to the browser history.
However, there are some benefits to the front channel.
And the reason OAuth uses the front channel for retrieving the code
is that it is useless without the client secret,
and it allows the user to be involved, to give consent.
Functional requests also don't require the recipient to have an IP address,
which works well with browsers and native web applications.
Unfortunately, for public clients,
making a back channel request is extremely challenging.
Firstly, it is a cross-origin request.
And until recently, browsers blocked these for JavaScript.
But the main issue is storing the secret.
Anyone can download the code for a JavaScript application and just view it.
some malicious JavaScript could try to steal the token or the secret.
And in the native app, it's the same issues.
To work around these limitations, the implicit flow was created.
It essentially is the same as the authorization code grant,
but without the back channel request.
Rather than returning the code back after the user consents,
the access token is returned via the front channel to the public app.
It's still a viable option,
just not as secure as the authorization code grant due
to going over the front channel.
But to date,
a lot of organizations still use it by ensuring they use correct content
security policies and don't use questionable CDNs.
Having said that, as of April this year,
the OAuth working group no longer recommends the
implicit flow for public clients,
mainly because cross-site origin resource sharing is now
universally adopted by most browsers.
So the authorization code flow with proof of key exchange is
now a viable method and is recommended.
I won't go into the details of this as it could be a course in
itself and is a little out of scope for the course.
Either way, once you get the access token in your public client,
you need to store it somewhere,
which is another challenge for single page applications.
Your options are either in the session,
in the cookie where you will have to deal with cross-site request forgery,
local storage where it will live forever unless your
application specifically removes it,
hence short expiration times is advisable in that case,
and also session storage,
which lives as long as your browser session as long as
the tab in your browser is open.
Additionally, it's not shareable between tabs,
so it's slightly more secure than local storage.
From the perspective of Spring Security however,
your main concern is dealing with a request hitting your controller
where the authentication took place externally.
However,
it's still worth understanding the challenges we just described so that
you can add additional checks and scrutiny server-side.
Now, for the remainder of this module,
we will be working with a React version of the portfolio.
And for the record, my specialty is not front-end development, so apologies beforehand for my JavaScript coding.